hey everyone I think we can  get
hey everyone I think we can get
started so
this is the storybond design
discussion in which we discuss protocol
changes related to soroban  our topic
changes related to soroban our topic
today is  State expression we're going
today is State expression we're going
to keep talking about
rent and temporary
storage Ledger entries
so  Garen can you take it away
so Garen can you take it away
yeah so I think at the talent of the
last week's meeting we were discussing
about what happens when entries are
delayed with outstanding run balance
and we decided that it was probably
not a good idea to refund
the outstanding balance and instead
just have the balance be burned  the
just have the balance be burned the
reason for this is that if you allow
rent balance refund then you open up a
lot of kind of a malicious attack
vectors  for instance
vectors for instance
because entries automatically have a
run bump whenever they're touched you
can have a smart contract that has every
invocation of a function Touch One
admin entry for instance and then this
adminant tree especially for a popular
contract could have lots of rent balance
because it's touched another function
call and then you could have an admin of
this contract who maliciously deletes
and recreates that entry periodically in
order to essentially steal this rent
balance from the collars of the function
and also this would be difficult for
users to  be able to detect or even
users to be able to detect or even
see if the stack Vector exists because
for something like an admin entry it
would seem like a normal operation for
and not another contract to either
create or modify that entry and so it'd
be difficult to detect these sorts of
attacks
also refunding my balance doesn't really
make sense because many different users
May pay for the rent balance only a
single user benefits from the refund and
so for these reasons it seems that the
best policy for whenever an entry is
delayed without standing rent balance is
just for this rent balance to be burned
now even though we're burning on this
outstanding Grant Balance we still want
there to be an incentive to delete
entries before they're archived
because even though we have the state
expiration to reduce the size of The
Ledger when an effort a restorable entry
or like that's what we're calling Now
entries that are eligible for archival
so in non-temporary entry but whenever
these entries run out for end even
though they're delayed from The Ledger
they still have to be stored perpetually
in the archive and so if you have an
entry that's no longer going to be used
it's significantly more advantageous for
this entry to be deleted instead of
being sent to the archive because even
though the archive is kind of like our
deep storage and it's much slower and we
have much more we're learning there for
large amounts of state it would still be
better just to have not have useless
entries or entries that will never be
used again taking space in The Ledger or
the eye archive and so since we can't
incentivize this Behavior via a rent
bounce  refund we're thinking instead
bounce refund we're thinking instead
of adding a base fee called the archival
fee and essentially what this would be
is just some flat fee probably tied to
the size of Ledger entry that you have
to pay in order to create the entry
initially and then if you delete the
entry before it gets archived you
receive this as a refund and so this
allows you to have someone set up for
deletion and then if you don't delete an
entry and gets into the archive then
this  archival fee is  burned and so
this archival fee is burned and so
the thinking being that this gives users
incessive to delete entries before it
gets into the archive but because it is
a fixed rate and is not something that
can grow to large amounts like red
balance it can't be gained nearly as
much and one of the drawbacks is that
this does make you know the answers more
expensive and this also increases the
size of the entry because we'll have to
store the archival feed as a parameter
so it increases the size of all entries
by about four bytes
but I think this provides a good
incentive and can help us maintain the
hygiene of the archive and so I guess
General thoughts on both the issue about
burning rent balance that's outstanding
and also on this new archival basically
foreign
so I think yeah I think on the red
balance  getting burnt  I think
balance getting burnt I think
we're pretty much in agreement  unless
we're pretty much in agreement unless
someone else  has a different opinion
someone else has a different opinion
there
I am very much concerned about
introducing yet another type of V
for  for the purpose of motivating
for for the purpose of motivating
people to delete their their entries
especially because we already have
temporary storage which hopefully
should take care of of like most of
these cases like what is can you give us
a use case  for like when a
a use case for like when a
non-temporary
entry might get deleted and how often
do these happen
yeah so just have to depend on usage
patterns
and so
one thing with the temporary entries is
that their lifetime is fixed to a set
amount or to a very limited time frame
and so  this is built for security
and so this is built for security
reasons but also just  for  fee
reasons but also just for fee
based reasons as well that temporary
entries will have a maximum  life
entries will have a maximum life
something probably on the magnitude of
like months so like three months or six
months or something like that the exact
value happened on the side yet
so I think that there's a use case for
say you have something like a payment
Channel
that doesn't need to be preserved
these don't want it to last longer than
the maximum life of the temporary
entry would be and so I think for
Android types like that that aren't
super important from the security
standpoint but have a variable length
time or a variable length lifetime then
there might be  some advantageous here
there might be some advantageous here
for deletion I think the second issue
too is if we have this archival fee it
provides more incentive to use temporary
entries as well because right now the
savings you get from a temporary entry
are relatively minimal because there's
still essentially how we calculate the
temporary entry fee is that say if your
temporary entry lasts 128 ledgers what
you do is that we take a snapshot of the
current rent fee multiply that by 128
and that's how much temporary entry
costs and so today a temporary entry and
a restorable entry are very similar in
price and so I could see  Network
price and so I could see Network
incentives being well like well they're
essentially the same so just be on the
safe side I'll use a restorable entry
when a temporary entry really could do
so that's the second advantage to having
a space feed is that by adding this fee
to the restorable entry types
and not adding this fee to the
temporary entry types you also widen the
gap between the cost of a temporary
entry and a costly restorable entry to
further incentivize more use of these
temporary entries and lessen the
restorable entry type
have you considered any other options
for widening the the gap between
temporary entries and restorable
entries that doesn't include an
archography
oh so there's like a  there's an
oh so there's like a there's an
implicit  savings because the rent fee
implicit savings because the rent fee
snapshot and because rent fees tied to
the bucket list size  generally
the bucket list size generally
speaking at least  for the access
speaking at least for the access
patterns you're seeing on  starting
patterns you're seeing on starting
classic now this might you know vary
because we haven't seen soap on traffic
yet in the real world
but the bucket list grows relatively
linearly and so because temporary
entries are locking into the fee and we
expect the bikeless size and therefore
the print fees to increase linearly you
are getting a cheaper rate because
you're able to snapshot that being said
especially for short-lived entries
the settings are pretty minimal because
the rent fee doesn't  grow at a very
the rent fee doesn't grow at a very
fast rate and so I think
they're I'm trying to think if there are
any other implicit fee signs at the
moment but I think if we want to
incentivize temporary storage from a
feed perspective we will have to add
some additional costs to the to the
restorable entry camera points
counterparts now whether that be a
refundable fee or other fee that's
refunded on deletion or just a fee of
creation that's immediately burned
I think either of those could work
but I think we do need to have some sort
of price discrepancy in addition to the
implicit discrepancy in the rent fee
snapshot
alternatively if we think that we don't
need to incentivize these are temporary
entries from a feed perspective and then
just the utility they provide is good
enough incentive on their own could also
go back route
but that could
cause more archivable and restorable
entry types  than we want floating
entry types than we want floating
around the network and make our archives
larger than they really should be
okay
yeah the question is how much bigger
will will they get because
this idea of
yeah like creating like this this
you know middle you know basically
what you're saying you're like  is is
what you're saying you're like is is
that there's there's a whole
category of like Ledger entries that
are like between temporary and
restorable that could theoretically like
not be archived
and we're going to introduce another fee
mechanism specifically for them
and
but and we already have a fairly you
know across the board we have a
non-trivial like fee  you know various
non-trivial like fee you know various
fee mechanisms so introducing another
one is something that I'm I'm
not entirely comfortable with
it yeah yeah yes  any other potential
it yeah yeah yes any other potential
saving is just
that the temporary entries never require
proofs  for creation whereas some
proofs for creation whereas some
types of restore boundaries require
briefs which is another difference
that could be useful so for instance in
the using storage type requires a proof
of non-existence to create or temporary
entries never require proof that being
said  the recreational storage type
said the recreational storage type
does not require such groups
I think I think temporary entries are a
powerful primitive on their own
and so I'm not sure how much we need to
incentivize their use from a fee
perspective
so I'm just curious as to people who
know like the  the smart contract
know like the the smart contract
ecosystem better than me are like the
temporary entry is strong enough on
their own and do we not need this
additional archival incentive
foreign
yeah so I think the  you know the main
yeah so I think the you know the main
use case we're we're seeing for  for
use case we're we're seeing for for
temporary storage is   oracles
temporary storage is oracles
we've talked with some of like the major
Oracle providers who would love to see
this
and so
I I don't think even if there's
you know if even if there's
like even if with not a lot more fees
they can get archivable storage I don't
think they'll be interested in doing
this because again their data is really
short-lived  is relevant  for a
short-lived is relevant for a
short-lived time
the other thing is that if
like actually
if if we add this archive or fee people
will actually need to reclaim it right
so that's like we're basically adding an
operational burden on these entities to
actually reclaim their fees
through but I mean I I'm but this is
sort of place temporary entries right so
with the Oracle use case
still want  you know temporary
still want you know temporary
interest of course this doesn't replace
that I guess the the question is
is there a good or is deleting a
restorable entry  happen often enough
restorable entry happen often enough
to
have the complexity of an extra fee and
to add the additional four byte
archival fee value right now I'm
hearing no but that's probably not a use
case that will happen very often and I
kind of like appropriate and thinking
about
yeah I guess I guess my my opinion
understand is is clear is there anyone
else with
thoughts in the matter
what is the cost of letting this go to
archives like getting like a having a
archival entry like go to the archives
and stuff instead of again deleted
also just the the thing about the
archive is that it never shrinks so
if an entry gets archived then you have
to store that in the archive versus if
the entry gets deleted then you don't
have to store it  in addition even
have to store it in addition even
once an entry is restored from the
archive we still have to keep
essentially a stub of its existence in
the archive so what happens is that
whenever an entry is restored
it's Leaf node that uses from The
Ledger entry as nulled out but the path
to the node still needs to be maintained
for all eternity and so I think just
given that the archive is pretty much
append only
it is designed such that you know
this is like a slow data structure
that's meant to be you know like the the
archive nodes are essentially just like
you know SSD base and they're meant
for storing large amounts of data and so
it's not nearly as sensitive as the
ledger size but it is something that we
should probably keep in mind as that if
we send something to the archive at
least some of that data even if it's
restored later will have to live forever
which is why if there's an entry that
user will never use I would much rather
that interview deleted than having to
store it perpetually in an archive even
though archives are kind of meant to
store things perpetually
based off of what you said like I would
expect  temporary like I think you
expect temporary like I think you
mentioned that the fee difference
between temporary storage and
non-temporary storage it like is like
negligible but I would expect it to be
someone significant just based off what
you said
oh what do you mean like I mean like it
would make sense if we made temporary
storage cheaper to incent to not
incentivize what you're describing worry
just like using
recreatable storage
well that's actually another thing we
could do is instead of adding an
additional fee to archival storage what
we could say is right now
temporary storage is just the feed
calculation it's just a number of
letters to live times current rent fee
what we could do is just say like
numbers of ledgers to the times current
rent fee times like 0.8 or some like
temp fee
you know multiplier  such that the
you know multiplier such that the
temporary entries are still based on the
current size of the bucket list
and so they can still increase or
decrease in price as the Ledger state
grows or shrinks but they're strictly
cheaper than archive entries
by a significant margin and that also
kind of simplifies the fee story because
we're not adding an additional fee type
because we already have separate fees
for temporary entries and so this would
just make them  always smaller
just make them always smaller
that would actually probably be a
much simpler better idea than I think
having this refundable archival fee
thing
yeah I guess this doesn't  incentivize
yeah I guess this doesn't incentivize
the actual deletion of those of those
entries but I think you've seen less of
them yeah I think if  temporary
them yeah I think if temporary
entries are significantly cheaper or at
least substantially cheaper then we
didn't don't really need to incentivize
deletion because if you're thinking
about like what what the use case for
restorable
entries are especially for like the
recreatable type is pretty much just
balances and I mean the I think the
amount of balance deletions is probably
pretty small and so I don't think it's
probably a huge case of special case for
it
yeah I completely agree I think if we if
we figure out a way to Discount  the
we figure out a way to Discount the
temporary
entries the way that you described
that will go a long way towards making
people use them
and in terms of  you know the previous
and in terms of you know the previous
point on  saving space for archivers
point on saving space for archivers
I I hear you the question there is like
you know like how much like makes it
worth it like if we saved them you know
ten percent of space like does does that
worth  is that worth the added
worth is that worth the added
complexity like obviously if we can if
we can save archivers
you know an order of magnitude's base
or a goose in order of magnitude the the
amount of space required then that is
like a huge win but I don't think we'll
get there I think there's like a pretty
narrow use case for these deletable
restorable entries so  definitely my
restorable entries so definitely my
vote is for like  the discount
vote is for like the discount
approach for temporary storage
yeah I think I blame the discount
approach too I think also just like on
the  our order of priorities we should
the our order of priorities we should
prioritize kitten won't let your small
and not prioritize keeping the
archive small that much  especially if
archive small that much especially if
it's like I think like a 10 decrease
wouldn't be that big of a deal so I
think I'm also leaning towards the
the discount temporary entries
approach as well
are there any last thoughts before I
move on I guess the conclusion was
discount temporary entries and have no
refunds for archival storage
I'm thinking of is that if we go that
route right where we we basically say
hey the
archives are kind of a dunking ground of
like
all abundant major entries
I think what we have to
maybe like take into account is  I
maybe like take into account is I
think it's probably okay like I mean
imagine that those nodes that are going
to be used as a
to to back up those  high value Legend
to to back up those high value Legend
trees yeah the problem will end up doing
some level of filtering like they only
for example
people on the keep our own Villages for
things that look like balances for
example or that are related to balances
as opposed to like random stuff
but I think even in that situation
I think they have to keep the full
training around
right or hashes yeah
so when how often does do we reset the
tree is it like on a pair
restart the the tree
it's currently your epochs
it's every year
so then the Assumption will be that you
know in a year
we don't have too much of this  craft
we don't have too much of this craft
accumulating
which might be okay
I mean that's kind of kind of like the
yeah like the
I think for yeah for for those entries
that are not
like you know you were talking about
it as a discount to get to the
for the pricing of
of
like you know attempts I think it's the
other way around it's more like you you
add actually
so there's probably like a constant
term and then a  additional  you
term and then a additional you
know rate on top of the the price to to
get to the
restorable entry fee like the very first
time you created and I think there's
probably a constant Factor
[Music]
I did want to bring  Ian from
I did want to bring Ian from
from the crowd  to speak because he
from the crowd to speak because he
has some  interesting perspective and
has some interesting perspective and
is very passionate about it
sorry I was so passionate I've  I've
sorry I was so passionate I've I've
written papers on this topic  for
written papers on this topic for
other blockchains as a paid service
so I've done  a wide breadth of study
so I've done a wide breadth of study
as well as deep diving into different
trade-offs that were done and this
influenced their design decisions
but they're slow to move and slow to
change
so there's a couple different concepts
here the first one I want to cover is
dust and that's the idea that the value
of a record maybe less than the cost of
maintaining it
and those records should probably be
cleaned up automatically but it's a
problem on ethereum because you can
never quite spend out a whole wallet you
always have a little bit left over and
so that little bit left over is referred
to as just but that's only one example
of dust there's many of them
the second kind of approach here is
that there's a huge ecosystem that's
growing around smart contracts
and each of those ecosystem
players has different data needs and
there's no one solution that fits
everybody
and  even you know other monolithic
and even you know other monolithic
chains are are dealing with storage
problems and then any modular chain
has an extreme storage problem
and the storage problem needs to be
addressed in a way that you don't have
nodes needing to install like four
different protocols four different
systems in order to access the data
that's being referenced
sometimes it might be
10 or 15 different storage protocols in
order just to access what was in a hash
what was in a roll-up what was intended
by the data that was submitted to the
blockchain
for one second in in the context of the
current state expiration proposal by
Garand like what are you trying to say
hmm
so you need to have different tiers of
pricing a rent model is insufficient and
and so is a couple other you know like
sort of well we see this problem now
what are we going to do there's not one
solution that fits it it's really
important to give a lot of flexibility
to the people that are deploying on the
on the network and give them as many
options with pricing up front and they
will simply do whatever is most
efficient in order to save money up
front if you try to to add an incentive
like later on
there's a few problems one is that
your adoption is going to be very low
and the second is that you're going to
you're not going to have
what they're necessarily looking for
if they can just pay again to extend the
lifetime of that storage
then that's that's the best of both
worlds
ideally there'll be an external
storage for large amounts of data for
example blob data
should be not stored necessarily on
chain but on a separate layer
and you can incentivize the creation
of those systems by limiting the amount
of on-chain storage
but allowing pointers to exist
so your your best long-term solution
when people start doing crazy things
with blockchain which they're starting
to but they're struggling to because the
storage costs are so high is that you're
going to start seeing a lot of
you know flexibility wins the day and
so if you have pricing tiers automatic
expiration
optional renewal and you're charging by
the byte by the by the day or in some
cases by the minute then you're able to
meet most of those use cases
there are go ahead please I believe
this is what we're pretty much doing
I could be mistaken but if I'm
understanding your proposal correlates
that you have different tiers that
automatically expire but the option to
renew I believe that's what we're doing
with the temporary entries the temporary
entries being automatically deleting and
being the cheapest whereas the
restorable entry types must be
periodically renewed so to speak
I it is are you proposing something
that's different than this
well I heard different proposals and I
think that I embrace what you're saying
in terms of
tier proposals I would just suggest
number one that there's a a large number
of tears at least four and number two
some of the data will be  archived
some of the data will be archived
with no ability to recall or if you
excluded from archive with no ability
recall some can be removed and not
archived but pay an oracle to recall it
and some can be
you know permanently archived
now I'm confused  by you say remove
now I'm confused by you say remove
you can pay an article two
call it what do you mean by that
I believe that's how our accountable
system is essentially R5  the archive
system is essentially R5 the archive
is off chain
and then you pay to restore something
from the archive so link to our archive
proposal
is essentially the Oracle system
you're talking about
so if it's an optional flag they can pay
for it if they think they need it but
your archive is still smaller the reason
that you might want to do that is that
some people specialize in storage and
they want to earn a fee for specializing
in storage and by specializing I mean
over 20 terabytes probably around you
know a petabyte or so
okay so I think  Ian if you can maybe
okay so I think Ian if you can maybe
refer back well we can drop a link
here to the  to the actual proposal
here to the to the actual proposal
and we'd love to hear feedback  about
and we'd love to hear feedback about
specifically I think that the type of
issues that you are  or the type of
issues that you are or the type of
solutions you're talking about are
actually embedded there  but we'd love
actually embedded there but we'd love
to hear if you think that's not the case
we're talking to details now but I
believe the archival system is pretty
similar to what you propose actually but
you can definitely add some comments in
the docs
so I guess
are you ready to move on to Temporary
entry issues
okay
so I guess and the second thing
and this is somewhat relevant to the
previous conversation is temporary
entries so our current interface
and I guess
we've concluded that
the temporary entries are
substantially cheaper than the
restorable entry types if I have some
multiply or something like that
if we have the temporary entries
currently the interface is you define a
key to find Value and Define a TTL
measured in ledgers such that
our time to live such that the entry
is guaranteed to be deleted on the exact
Ledger that you specify now
systematically under the hood the entry
is not actually removed on that ledger
it persists in the bucket list for that
sometime but it is inaccessible
now one of the open questions we have is
whether or not we should allow users to
increase the TTL arbitrarily and in the
current proposal we do not allow this
there are two reasons there's a
security reason and a gamification
reason so first for the security reason
we suspect that there is a strong use
case
for temporary entries
when it comes to things like allowances
or kyc where if you specify an allowance
that should only last 10 ledgers
mentioned the last exactly 10 ledgers
and by allowing  contracts to Define
and by allowing contracts to Define
behavior that increases TTL you can have
foot guns where a buggy implementation
might have some security a temporary
authorization that should only last a
short amount of time but by  allowing
short amount of time but by allowing
life extension Primitives you are
potentially allowing bugs for security
purposes that's issue number one issue
number two is out of gamification
and so the whole issue with  temporary
and so the whole issue with temporary
entries is that we want them to be
cheaper but we don't want them to be a
way to game the rent system and what I
mean by that is if  continually
mean by that is if continually
extending the TTL of a temporary
entry is cheaper than  just paying
entry is cheaper than just paying
rent that kind of excuse Network
Dynamics
now I'm not exactly sure actually this
is something we should avoid because
temporary entries are self-deletion
deleting so maybe we should allow users
to just continually extend the life and
essentially have cheaper rent than if
they would create a restorable entry and
just pay rent balances on those ledgers
so perhaps this is something we want to
allow but at least for now it seems that
that's a a somewhat unfair usage for the
temporary entries and we wouldn't want
temporary entries to be used and to be
able to continually extend their TTL
such that they can drastically or pay
significantly reduce the amount of rent
and so their print system we do not
allow modification of the TTL now there
is an implicit way to extend the life of
an entry what you can always do is load
the entry
delete it and then recreate the entry
with the exact same value that's still
allowed and so you can essentially buy
this delete rewrite pattern
specialized special case and extend
the entry with the same key value if you
really want to but we provide no way to
essentially keep the same entry books in
the TTL
and so I'm wondering if there are any
additional thoughts on this should we
allow arbitrary detail extension should
we not
this is a slight side point maybe and
kind of a question it seems like the
difference between restorable entries
and tempor entries
is temporary entries you have to
well this is your question I guess is
should we allow rent bumps or do you is
it prepay only for temporary entries but
it seems like the only real difference
is restorable ones go to the archive and
temporary ones do not go to the archive
is that roughly true or not quite
yeah correct  there's a couple of
yeah correct there's a couple of
other differences like  so right now
other differences like so right now
like temporary entries are prepaid up
front and so you get a better rate
because you're paying essentially like
for months like you're paying for a
large amount of ledgers instead of
one-offs
I guess I'm saying could we just have
one type of thing that there's basically
two different things there's how much
Renta has which is how long it stays on
chain
and then whether or not you've paid for
it to go to the archive after that point
or not right and if you pay more rent up
front for either of them you get a
discount
and then this whole
cheaper way to use it goes away
so I think we shouldn't Define a
difference and that's because  the the
difference and that's because the the
primary difference and I should have
mentioned this is that temporary entries
I have strict lifetimes whereas Right
Now restorable entries do not have
strict lifetimes and so just the way
that the buck list Works
we have a variable per larger red fee
and because it's you know variable we
don't know what the Run fee of a given
Ledger will be until that ledger occurs
which means in order for the database to
be up to date on the live rent values of
every entry we have to iterate through
the entire Ledger and decrement the rent
balance of every single entry which is
impossible from an efficiency standpoint
and so because of this we charge really
much retroactively which means that for
restorable entries  they live and are
restorable entries they live and are
accessible longer than they should be
the exact number is that we have about
like  on the lowest level bucket we
like on the lowest level bucket we
have right now about 30 days of
quote-unquote free rent where a
restorable entry has out of rent but
it's still accessible in live temporary
entries have very definite time
timelines whereas they only exist for
128 ledgers no more no less and I think
for that's a powerful permit for
security purposes which is one of the
reasons we want to distinguish between
the two yeah
okay but were you just asking about we
should do allow rent bumps for temporary
entries
well so  not necessarily around bumps
well so not necessarily around bumps
but but TTL extension
and so  in the current proposal of
and so in the current proposal of
the rent system applies to restorable
entries whereas they have a rent balance
which is some about xlm which is
deducted form
and so their amount of legislative is
not exact
the the Quan quote web bump for
temporary entries isn't increasing the
rent balance because temporary entries
do not have a rent balance rather it's
increasing the TTL and so even if you
allow changing of ttls
you are it's not so much a rent bump
because you still have a very definitive
timeline and very definitive depth
Ledger if you will
so I'll defer to you on that thank you
my bias is not to allow
extending the TTL
hey it's just another piece of
functionality that people need to wrap
their head around
but also it doesn't sit that well with
how like my mental model of what a
temporary  Ledger entry is so when I
temporary Ledger entry is so when I
think about a temporary Ledger entry I
think about a piece of information that
I'm like broadcasting to the world for
the next end ledgers
and that's it so
if if I if I update that like what what
does that actually mean like what is the
actual use case for updating these
temporary  Ledger entries
yeah I personally don't know what the
use cases I think
one possible
advantage of updating the entries is if
you have a  some a type that is
you have a some a type that is
trivially recreatable so you don't care
if it gets deleted
but you also want it to exist someone
perpetually I can imagine a efficient
solution where if the TTL is below like
say 100 ledgers or something then use
extended arbitrarily
and if for whatever reason
you miss a TTL bump and it does get
deleted these arbitrarily recreated and
so in this case you want to use an
archivable type because it's triviably
recreatable and so it wouldn't be worth
restoring
but also you want to use it
perpetually and so you would you
wouldn't want a strip TTL now again
you know we could also do is just like
do a temporary entry set to the maximum
TTL and then if it doesn't exist just
recreate it and then again set to the
max dtl that's also possible for
arbitrarily recreable data but that's
just a use case I could think of the top
of my head I don't know if anyone else
has
perhaps more interesting or is more
knowledgeable in the smart contract
space wants to share their thoughts
well I guess maybe like the with the CTL
thing like
why are we trying to babysit so much
like the you know like the the contract
like like it feels like
you know not allowing access
of an entry right past its TTL that's
like
and not allowing bumps you know for that
reason sounds like we are
stepping over the boundary in terms of
responsibility like the contract you
know if the contract doesn't want
something to be valid Beyond a
certain time like that should be
implemented in the contract itself I
think
and and if we do something like that
I think then the the bumping that we're
talking about
I think we just have to make sure that
when  an entry gets bumped
when an entry gets bumped
the number
you know the
the  the actual expiration time will
the the actual expiration time will
match the  the  lifetime in the in
match the the lifetime in the in
in the in the in the in the bucket list
right like so so like if you're
so at creation time that means we have
to have like a
a function that allows you to to
compute the
[Music]
like if you want to go from a number of
ledgers or a number or actually number
of ledgers you can do that of chain but
like  or actually time is the same
like or actually time is the same
thing
yeah like I guess bumping like where it
gets a little bit complicated is yeah
just you have like some number and then
you try to say okay extend it by
at least 30 days because you won't be
able to
to
to actually do exactly 30 days if we
don't make that strict TGI and you don't
want people to pay  to get free runs
want people to pay to get free runs
right for
for whatever is the
you know it takes too much that that for
to actually expire that entry
but that seems walkable I mean those are
like help of functions right like that
we can expose to the
that are basically like allow you to
kind of Reason about about the bucket
list
well I guess the the interface would be
a little weird though because
essentially what you could do is the
CTL you could make temporary entries but
it would have to be a power of four
ledgers so like four zero fourth one Etc
but with a maximum lifetime being 30
days
and that just seems it just seems like a
weird and not super user-friendly
interface to
to not have a a stripped thousand on a
TTL because at least like I'm thinking
of like use case it just seems from a
from a contract developer perspective
you know they don't have knowledge of
the bucket list and so it just seems
weird that you have this temporary entry
that can only expire on Powers of four
for some reason  with poor granularity
for some reason with poor granularity
and I think it's it's weird from a
security standpoint if you want
something to only live 128 that you have
this entrance type called temporary
entries that is self-deleting but you on
top of the self delaying temporary entry
have to still in addition to that
Implement your own TTL if for your use
case it doesn't work to be on the exact
boundary power of four  it just seems
boundary power of four it just seems
that like we're exposing too much of the
underbelly of the system between the
developers in that case
so just to be on just to be clear if I
use a non-power of  what is it power
use a non-power of what is it power
for
remember it will still live until
like past my TTL until the the next
Power four yeah so the way that just
because of the nature of the bucket list
apocalypse DB we can only remove
entries from the data structure
on  power of four ledgers and so
on power of four ledgers and so
in the current implementation
we have the TTL which is stored as a
field inside the entry and so the entry
itself does live on The Bucket List
beyond the TTL in most cases unless it
happens to be a power four
but we just like do a check whenever
you're trying to access that entry and
if the TTL Ledger has passed we just
return nulls if it doesn't exist even
though it does exist on The Ledger and
then we garbage collect on Powers of
four
okay that that makes a lot of sense
so
so I'm a bit confused as to what  Nico
so I'm a bit confused as to what Nico
just said like what the what's the
confusing bit here also I think Nico is
suggesting not to have the TTL field as
part of protocol and to  if users want
part of protocol and to if users want
a strip TTL they must Implement that
themselves and essentially they're
struck that they store must have the TCL
value and instead just expose an
interface where temporary entries
live and are accessible as long as
they're accessible on the bucket list
and so when you specify a TTL you must
specify a power for TTL Nico my
understanding that correctly
yeah basically it's kind of like  I
yeah basically it's kind of like I
mean you still have a TTL it's more like
it's actually it's it's more it's
represents the we were in a special case
the  like right now right like if you
the like right now right like if you
have a if you load an entry that is in
the bucket list but that has an expired
TTL
you consider that it's not there and
that we will get rid of that special
casing by doing that and and just
requiring
that the the TTL that you have is is
is actually going to expire on the on a
bucket boundary yeah
like yeah I I agree with  with Garen I
like yeah I I agree with with Garen I
think this is the potential like we like
there's only so much we can expect from
developers to understand the bucket list
here and I think the the basic
expectation from a temporary storage
is
you know saying you know telling the
platform this is this is how many
ledgers I want this thing to live for
and and putting restrictions on that
or repeat or you know telling people you
can only use powers before and if you
want to do it like an exact detail then
you need to write your own smart
contract I think that's
not the ideal product experience
yeah I think yes the reason I mentioned
that was to allow for bumping that here
because if you if you have actually
if you're a number if you want to allow
bumping you have to take into account
what is actually happening under the
covers
I I don't know if it's too complex but I
kind of
I kind of think we're solving two
different problems here I think there is
the case of a temporary entry  or that
the case of a temporary entry or that
has a certain deadline  and dies and
has a certain deadline and dies and
then  such as like kyc or like a an
then such as like kyc or like a an
allowance you want to exist for 10
letters and 10 letters exactly that's
case one and there's a second case of
you have the century you don't really
care how long to live as long as it
lives around this time and then you
might want to bump it on every access I
feel like those are two different
classes of storage and I think a
temporary entry with a exact TL sells
one issue and so I'm wondering if it
might be reasonable to have like a flag
say on on the recreatable storage to say
archive or not archive
because I feel like that's a
different use case than what at least in
one on the temporary entry with the
exact details getting at
but again that might be too complicated
having now like three or four different
storage types you know or
yeah I would rather not add anything
else here  I think that the the the
else here I think that the the the
first case that you described the one
that  you know a contract wants to
that you know a contract wants to
you know put a ledger entry for exactly
n ledgers I think that's the common case
and that's the thing that we should
that we should  cater for
that we should cater for
if they want to have more  you know
if they want to have more you know
sophisticated situations in which  you
sophisticated situations in which you
know they can they can
recreate or or or bump this entry once
in a while then you know they can write
a smart contract that that achieves that
functionality that can be updated at
specific times
but I think we need to keep the  you
but I think we need to keep the you
know keep the the main contract to
something that's
you know like the common use case
yeah I think if  if you want
yeah I think if if you want
essentially like Implement that behavior
it's still possible or just like  if
it's still possible or just like if
like the  the ttls within X number of
like the the ttls within X number of
Legends just deleted and recreate the
same value with a maximum TTL that's
very possible
and especially if we have a discount
temporary entrance the deletion
Recreation path might be at cost or
cheaper than a restorable entry so I
think that seems like a reasonable
approach
I think I'd rather not expose
spotless powers for to any post-function
or SDK
okay it seems fine to not expose it then
but at the same time like
if we focus more on the on the
actual what is that TTL is it a
you know do we want that to be
a
more of a leave at least for you know a
given time
and that way you can allow you know
anybody to bump that ledger entry
or do you want to have that be more like
that strict thing like that you
mentioned and because this strict
definition of teachers seems super I
don't know
a bit a bit too special I don't know
like it doesn't seem like
it's it's implicit it's it's it's not
it's unlike other types of storage that
we have
but
I disagree here like I think the the con
the interface that people are looking
for is I want this to live for this
amount of time  and The Ledger number
amount of time and The Ledger number
here is just a good approximation for
for time like this idea of I want to
live this I wanted this thing to live
for at least this amount of time and the
actual length of how much it lives
depends on like the underlying
implementation it's not that's not the
case anymore because what we said you
know the discussion we had right before
was hey let's let's move the use cases
where people don't want archival through
those temporary entries
the TTL is not about
having this strict thing right going
on it's about I don't want to parent I
just want to be you know cheaper and if
I have to refresh the thing and get it
refreshed in some way and
their contract in that case is not the
one necessarily responsible for
refreshing the the teachers or  any
refreshing the the teachers or any
anybody that cares basically in that
context
yeah I don't know in my mind it still
feels like Tom was talking about issue a
and then
Nico's tackling SUV does this seemed
like two infernally different use cases
it's not what we're saying is that if
people don't want this strict TTL they
are pushed to use a cable  you know
are pushed to use a cable you know
like those things that end up in the
archives
and therefore I end up on some of the
more expensive training
but what exists in this space between a
strict TTL and archivable Energies
what what would like give me an example
like what lives in that no this critical
is is  is another layer of
is is is another layer of
like
like the strict ETL
I mean I'm fine with this trick TTL it's
more like the the  what does it
more like the the what does it
actually mean what do we mean by
strategirl here like  like it becomes
strategirl here like like it becomes
a security feature
I'm saying like if we get rid of the
security feature basically allowing the
teacher to be expanded
then we have something actually that I
to me seems to make sense because now we
have like if you want to get into
archive use the you know recruitable
thing and it's kind of a you know you
just use run for that
or you use those temporary things that
yeah if you want to refresh it's manual
you have to do that
and you get a little bit of a discount
because  yeah yeah they don't go to
because yeah yeah they don't go to
the archive by default
and then if you want this trick like
super constricting that you know never
exactly a TTR that's exactly something
and you cannot bump
you have to implement that in your
contract
because yeah again like in terms of use
cases what type of Entry
when do you need something with a
teacher that is kind of  Frozen that
teacher that is kind of Frozen that
you can never change
well if you're in Oracle and you wanna
and you have  you know you publish
and you have you know you publish
like hourly
price feeds and you want them to live
exactly for an hour then you put a TTL
of a number of blocks that constitute
fairly like something that approximates
an hour
you mean like you don't want that thing
to stay on Ledger or for longer yoga I
mean as a record in that particular
scenario
you're going to override that entry
right well I think you're getting into
the contract implementation you can you
can see yeah
I'm publishing some data and I don't
want to pay for it you know after that
time
it doesn't mean that you know it's
not about I don't want to pay it's not
just about I want to pay for it for an
hour it's about this thing is relevant
for an hour like I don't actually want
this thing to be alive after an hour
that's part of the the payload like this
expiration is the contract puts that
meaning
like you're saying there are no use
cases where you don't want  like you
cases where you don't want like you
don't want this this strict
thing
from the chat a lot of people seem to
disagree with that notion
so what we could do actually
is
if I go for an extraction was just like
round up to the the nearest power four
or something like that and just like
allow like users to say arbitrary
ledgers and it may or may not last
longer
because
I think
as a storage medium I'm starting to
agree more with Nico such that I don't
know if we need to specialize a security
feature
in a storage interface because I think
perhaps we should make the storage
interface more General I I don't know
well what I'm saying is that I I I'm I
think it makes sense to the usability
aspect of
of  yeah when you say the teacher is
of yeah when you say the teacher is
like 10 legends right
if you don't do anything
after 10 measures that team is basically
appears to be deleted even though it's
still in the bucket list I think that's
an implementation detail
right and I think that's totally fine to
have that at the same time I think it
should be possible to bump that that
that TTL
if you want to go beyond energy and when
you bump it I mean that means you have
to pay for I mean it's not staying in
the bucket list right it's not going to
stay at the bottom it's basically kind
of like a rewrite
first of all we're going to implement it
and then yeah in terms of security
feature you wouldn't be able to rely
strictly on that layer for security for
the for guaranteeing that something is
going to be to live exactly  you know
going to be to live exactly you know
for for some time like if you want
that you have to put that in as part of
your
attach it to your data basically
okay so Gary it sounds like we are at a
bit of an impasse right now we probably
need to kind of like regroup look at the
pros and cons can you
like summarize this this
discussion and the pros and cons of the
different approaches that we've
discussed and potentially drop that
on  sir bondev later today
on sir bondev later today
and  hopefully we can asynchronously
and hopefully we can asynchronously
regroup and think about this
am I still on Gary can you hear me
I mean I can hear you I don't know if
Karen can
thanks Paul  maybe Garen is having
thanks Paul maybe Garen is having
some   troubles connecting and he's
some troubles connecting and he's
typing something
no we cannot hear Garand
regardless we are almost at time
right now
so I think this is a a good stopping
point to regroup and and think about
these things moving forward  Garen
these things moving forward Garen
will hopefully share this on  Sarah
will hopefully share this on Sarah
Von Dev and we can continue the
discussion there  we can also
discussion there we can also
people can feel free to stick around and
live chat and continue talking  thank
live chat and continue talking thank
you all for joining and  see you all
you all for joining and see you all
next week